Preface
=======

   *For surely there is an end; and thine expectation shall not be cut
   off.* â€” Proverbs 23:18

If you are looking for a simple and powerful general-purpose programming
language, *Go* would be a great choice. *Go* is an open source software
from Google and the project has lots of community contributions. The
project was started in 2007 by Robert Griesemer, Rob Pike, and Ken
Thompson. However, it was publicly released by Google as an open source
software in November 2009. *Go* is used by many organizations in
different problem domains. Remember, the search-friendly word for *Go*
is *Golang*.

This book is an introductory book that covers the basics of the Go
programming language. If you are new to programming, I hope this book is
going to be useful for you. If you studied programming a long time ago
and are looking for a refresher program, I would suggest you take a look
at the https://scratch.mit.edu website. The *Scratch* programming
language website will be helpful for those who have never programmed
seriously. Once you become comfortable with the fundamental concepts of
programming, you can come back to this book.

I started with Python programming around 2003, and since then, I have
worked on Python for more than a decade. One of my old colleagues
introduced me to *Go* in 2013. It was a refreshing experience when I
started with Go programming. There are lots of differences between
*Python* and *Go*, but I was impressed with the simplicity of *Go* in
the initial days. The learning curve was very smooth compared to some
other languages that I tried.

When I became interested in Go programming, one of the first things that
I decided was to write a book about it. Writing has been my passion for
a long time. I started writing a blog in 2004 on LiveJournal. I wrote my
first book about Zope component architecture in 2007. Writing is a fun
activity; even though, sometimes it becomes hectic. Since this is a
self-published book, there was no pressure on me, so it took quite some
time to get this book in good shape.

I have conducted many *Go* workshops in different parts of India. During
the workshops, I always wanted something more to offer to the
participants, and I hope this book will fill that vacuum.

Software development is not just about programming languages. There are
other skills you need to acquire, such as learning how to use a good
text editor/IDE, a version control system, and the operating system of
your choice. Moreover, pursue the learning of other languages and
technologies throughout your career. The Go programming language leans
towards a more object oriented style programming. You could also learn
functional programming languages like Scheme and Haskell.

Beyond technical skills, your business domain knowledge and soft skills
are essential for your career growth. Writing more about that would be
out of scope in this context, so let me leave it there and wish you a
successful career at this moment.

| Baiju Muthukadan
| Kozhikode, Kerala, India
| May 2023
